.TH oob 1
.UC 5
.SH NAME
oob \- OOC symbol file browser
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B oob
.RI [ options ]
.I <module-name>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B oob
displays the interface definition of a module as seen by the compiler.
It accepts a single argument: the name of a module or a file name,
which is stripped of its directory part and any suffix.  The symbol
file for the resulting module name is located using the 
.B PATHS
sections from the initialization files.  Once found, the contents of
the symbol file are written to
.I stdout
in a format resembling that of a module.  Note that the interface
definition is not derived from the module's source code, but rather
reconstructed from the module's symbol file.  In particular, the order
of declarations and any comments in the original source file are not
preserved.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --extended, -x
For record types, include the names of the base types, the inherited
records fields, and the inherited type-bound procedures in the output.
.TP
.B --config <file>
Use given file name for the primary initialization file.  An empty
name disables parsing of the default initialization file.
.TP
.B --include-config <file>
Include the given initialization file in addition to the default
initialization file.
.TP
.B --version
Write compiler version and exit.
.TP
.B --help, -h
Write short usage summary and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.I OOC_HOME
holds the name of the primary initialization file.
.SH FILES
.nf
.ta \w'module.SymXXXXX'u
module.Sym		symbol file
.Sp
.fi
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit status is 0 on success, and 1 if a symbol file is missing or
malformed.
.SH SEE ALSO
oo2c(1), OOC Reference Manual
.SH AUTHOR
Michael van Acken <acken@informatik.uni-kl.de>
