.TH ooef 1
.UC 5
.SH NAME
ooef \- OOC error filter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B oo2c 
.I ... 
|
.B ooef
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B ooef
.RI [ options ]
.I <module>
.I <pos>
.SH DESCRIPTION
The filter program 
.B ooef
can be used to transform error messages, as emitted by
.BR oo2c ,
into a more convenient format.  If no module name is given,
.B ooef
reads the output of 
.B oo2c
from 
.IR stdin ,
and writes a modified version to 
.IR stdout .
Error messages are rewritten, and the rest of the input is echoed.

If a module name and a file position are passed as arguments,
appropriate output is generated to designate the given position
in the module's source text.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --context, -c
Write an extract of the source text and insert additional lines to
point to the error position.  This is the default setting.  Lines
are numbered starting at 1.
.TP
.B --line, -l
Rewrite error message to
.IR file:line:error .
This will only give an approximation of the exact error position.  The
first line has the index 1.
.TP
.B --linecol, -L
Rewrite error message to
.IR file:line,column:error .
The first line has the number 1, likewise the first column.
.TP
.B --config <file>
Use given file name for the primary initialization file.  An empty
name disables parsing of the default initialization file.
.TP
.B --include-config <file>
Include the given initialization file in addition to the default
initialization file.
.TP
.B --version
Write compiler version and exit.
.TP
.B --help, -h
Write short usage summary and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.I OOC_HOME
holds the name of the primary initialization file.
.SH SEE ALSO
oo2c(1), OOC Reference Manual
.SH AUTHOR
Michael van Acken <acken@informatik.uni-kl.de>
